Dear Editor,

Please find below the response to the referees' brief remarks for the
submission "The velocity distribution of nearby stars from Hipparcos
data I. The significance of the moving groups" by myself and others
(submission # ApJ/318741/ART/207748).

We have made the changes and clarifications suggested by the referee,
but we have not made any changes to the scientific content of the
paper:

- In the second paragraph of section 2.2 we clarified how the
  projection matrices become rotation matrices in the specific
  application of the deconvolution technique described in section 2.2
  to the velocity distribution.

- In the third paragraph of section 7.3 we clarified why we do not
  consider the component of the Gaussian mixture with the largest
  weight to be a moving group. This should make it clear why we say
  that the moving group with the largest weight is located at
  (-23,-10) and not at (5,-7) (which is part of the background
  distribution).

- We added the discussion of the "truncation bias" which we gave in
  response to a question from the referee in the previous report to
  the first paragraph of section 2.1, the description of the sample.

A detailed response to all of the referee's comments is included below.

Please contact me by the information given below with any questions
regarding this re-submission.

With kind regards,

Jo Bovy

-
Jo Bovy
Ctr. for Cosmology & Particle Physics, 
Dept. of Physics
New York University
4 Washington Place
New York, NY 10003
jb2777@nyu.edu


In what follows the referee's comments are indented.



==================================================================

	Ref: ApJ/318741/ART/207748
	
	Dear Mr. Bovy,

	Manuscript #: 318741
	Title: The Velocity Distribution of Nearby Stars from Hipparcos data I.
	The Significance of the Moving Groups
	Authors: Jo Bovy et al.
	
	Appended below please find the referee's brief report on your
	revised submission to The Astrophysical Journal. Although
	quite pleased with the manuscript, the referee offers some
	rather straightforward suggestions for further improvement. I
	hope that you will consider the referee's suggestions, and
	will then soon resubmit the paper. If your response seems
	appropriate, and if you have made no other changes to the
	scientific content, then I expect that acceptance for
	publication can follow quickly.

	You can find the referee report and submit your revised
	version onyour personal author homepage hosted by IOP
	Publishing located
	athttp://ticket.iop.org/atomreg?digest=a89a4a4b58a7ea64ef3d42b3adf47701&urn=207748&expires=2010-05-19&skin=ej&exists=1&return=http://authors.iop.org/.
	You may need to choose a new username and password.

	The referee, Anthony Brown, has chosen to waive the customary
	anonymity. The ApJ prefers that you do not communicate
	directly with the referee. But if you do have any
	correspondence with Dr. Brown regarding this manuscript before
	its status is formally settled, please send me a copy, in
	accordance with ApJ policy.

	The policy of The Astrophysical Journal is to view manuscripts
	as withdrawn if no revised version is received within six
	months after the most recent referee's report goes to the
	authors.

	If you have any questions, please contact me.


	With best wishes,
	
	Butler Burton
	
	----------------------
	Prof. W. Butler Burton
	Associate Editor-in-Chief, The Astrophysical Journal
	Professor Emeritus, Leiden University
	National Radio Astronomy Observatory
	
	+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
	The text of the review is included below, after the double line.
	===============================================
	
	The authors have implemented most of my suggestions and
	section 2 isnow much clearer. The paper can be accepted for
	publication after theauthors the few remaining points below. I
	do not need to see a revisedversion of the paper.

	Comments
	--------
	
	At the top ofpage 12 the authors state that the projection
	matrices become rotationmatrices when vrad is set to
	zero. However, the matrix TA is aprojection matrix regardless
	of the value of vrad (all the matrices ineqs 2 and 3 are
	rotation matrices).

This was slightly unclear. In general the operator R_i can be a
projection matrix, however, in this application we use a large
uncertainty on the radial velocity and set vrad to zero, so in this
case R_i is a rotation matrix, whose inverse is TA. So it is in going
from the general situation to the specific application at hand that
the operator R_i goes from being a projection matrix to being a
rotation matrix, not by setting vrad to zero. We have cleared this up
in the text.

	Page 19, second paragraph,line 7 from the bottom: "and the
	dimension D of the space" should be"and D the dimension of the
	space" (?)

Yes, after adding a comma after D, I think that is right. This has
been changed in the text.

	Page 32, secondparagraph: The group with largest weight is
	located at (-23,-10) invelocity space. However, if I look at
	table 1, the largest amplitudeGaussian is at (5,-7).

The component at (5,-7) has the largest weight, but we do not consider
it a moving group in our first, naive analysis: Its large velocity
dispersion seems to indicate that it is part of the background
distribution of stars and it also does not correspond to any peak in
the distribution (see Fig. 20). So the moving group with the largest
weight is the component with the second largest weight. We have
cleared up this confusion in the text.

	In response to my question about thetruncation bias the
	authors argued that this is unlikely to affect thefact that
	the sample is kinematically unbiased, which is what mattersin
	the context of this paper. This was the kind of brief comment
	I hadin mind so it may as well be included in the text.

We have included it in the first paragraph of Section 2.1 where we
discus the sample.

	Typos
	-----
	
	Bottom of page 5: The name "Cabrera-Cano" is spelled with a
	tilde on the last n.

	Page 12, line 2 above eq (9): simply --> simple
	
	Page 13, 1 line above bottom of first paragraph: probabiitiy -->
	probability
	
	Page 14, second line of last paragraph: paramters --> parameters

All fixed! Thank you.

=	==================================================