Dear Editor,

Please find below the response to the referees' comments for the
submission "The Velocity Distribution of Nearby Stars from Hipparcos
Data II.  The Nature of the Low-Velocity Moving Groups" by myself and
David Hogg (submission #ApJ/341194/ART/207748).

We would like to thank the referee for a constructive report that
improved the paper.

Please contact me by the information given below with any questions
regarding this re-submission.

With kind regards,

Jo Bovy

-
Jo Bovy
Ctr. for Cosmology & Particle Physics,
Dept. of Physics
New York University
4 Washington Place
New York, NY 10003
jb2777@nyu.edu

=================================================================

List of changes:

We have made a number of changes following the referee's report. A
detailed response to all of the referee's comments is included
below. We made some additional changes:

- In the discussion section (section 9), we added a paragraph
  discussing the possible influence of radial mixing on our results
  for the metallicity distributions of the moving groups.

- In fitting the local metallicity distribution from GCS
  metallicities, we now take the uncertainty in the GCS [Fe/H] values
  into account (but only a typical value as the GCS data do not
  include individual uncertainties). This has not changed any
  conclusions.

- We expanded the discussion in section 8 and added a figure in
  response to a recent paper by Sellwood, in which he argues that the
  Hyades moving group corresponds to a resonant-scattering
  feature. The figure shows that the Hyades members do indeed seem to
  form a feature similar to that expected from scattering at the inner
  Lindblad resonance in this model. This is slightly at odds with the
  slight metallicity preference found in section 7 for the Hyades
  moving group, which we discuss in the text. 


In what follows the referee's comments are indented.

==================================================================

	Ref: ApJ/341194/ART/207748
	
	
	+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
	The text of the review is included below, after the double line.
	===============================================


	This paper addresses the question of the nature of the
	low-velocitymoving groups in the Solar neighbourhood. In my
	opinion, it deservespublication although some major
	clarifications would be needed,especially regarding some too
	speculative conclusions (see below).

	Aftera long historical introduction, the authors use the
	reconstruction ofthe local velocity distribution from Bovy et
	al. (2009 ApJ 700 1794) toassign moving group probabilities to
	stars. They then use the method ofFamaey, Siebert & Jorissen
	(2008 A&A 483 453), by comparing theobserved parallax with the
	one the stars would have had if they were onthe associated
	cluster isochrone (Fig. 4). The contribution of eachstar to
	the histogram is weighted by its probability to belong to
	themoving group calculated in Bovy et al. They conclude that
	the movinggroups are not associated with their related open
	cluster. They then goon testing the more general hypothesis
	that the moving groups areassociated with a single-burst
	stellar population. For this, theyassign a set of photometric
	parallaxes to stars assumed to belong tothe background disk,
	by assigning them a probability of having a givenabsolute
	magnitude knowing their color, and a set of
	photometricparallaxes corresponding to the hypothesis that
	these stars belong to acoeval population of homogeneous
	metallicity. They then estimate thebest-fit background
	contamination and the best-fit age and metallicityof a single
	burst event for each of the moving groups. The fact thatthe
	best fit contamination is close to 100 percent in all cases,
	andalways larger than the expected contamination from the
	background ifall moving group stars did belong to a coeval
	single burst population,confirms that these moving groups have
	a different origin than theevaporation of a single open
	cluster. This is summarized in Table 1,and is the core result
	of this paper, at the end of Section 6. Asdetailed below, I am
	not convinced that the digressions of Section 7have the same
	scientific value.

	Major comments:
	--------------
	
	1)What makes this result of Section 6 very interesting is that
	thebest-fit age and metallicity for a single burst population
	are verysimilar to those of the associated cluster, in
	particular in the caseof the Hyades moving group. This means
	that the authors have made anestimate of the number of stars
	in the Hyades moving group originatingfrom the evaporation of
	the Hyades cluster. If the expected backgroundcontamination is
	58%, and the actual proportion of stars compatiblewith being
	foreground stars evaporated from the Hyades cluster is 14%,it
	means that one third of the moving group stars could originate
	fromthe Hyades cluster. I think the authors should expand on
	thatparticular result, especially in the abstract, and compare
	it with theone of Famaey et al. (2007 A&A 461 957), where the
	analysis of themass function of the Hyades moving group was
	shown to be compatiblewith a proportion of about 40 percent
	(for stars of ~1.5 solar masses)to 15 percent (for stars of
	~0.8 solar masses) of moving group starsactually being past
	members of the Hyades cluster. Interestingly, thisproportion
	was found by Famaey et al. to decrease with the stellar
	mass(or with increasing B-V on the main sequence), a trend
	which theauthors should also test here to make their analysis
	more complete.


This is a very good point and indeed merits further examination.

To properly assess the significance of the result that there is a
non-zero foreground, especially for the Hyades moving group, we need
to be sure that actual open-cluster members are excluded from our
analysis. In our sample selection, we did not remove open-cluster
members, and 28 of the stars in the sample are actually members of the
Hyades moving group by the criteria we used to select a robust sample
of Hyades members from the Perryman et al. (1998) paper (because of
the very stringent membership criterium used to select these stars,
this should be considered a lower limit). These 28 stars are all
high-probability members of the Hyades moving group. This explains 28
out of the 261 expected Hyades-moving-group members, or 11
percent. Thus, our results are actually in mild disagreement with the
Famaey et al. results.

We have added this clarification at the end of Section 6.

	2)Section 7 is very speculative. Using the Geneva-Copenhagen
	Survey totest whether the moving groups are best-fitted by a
	higher-than-averageor lower-than-average metallicity is
	interesting, especially showingthat the Hyades moving group is
	the only one showing a preference formetallicities different
	(in that case slightly higher) than thebackground. This should
	definitely be kept in the paper. However, thespeculations on
	the consequences of this with respect to the
	differentdynamical scenarios is not clear at all. It should
	either be greatlyclarified, by adding appropriate calculations
	and/or references, ordeleted. The authors merely indicate
	that, in the case of a movinggroup associated with the OLR of
	the bar or the ILR of the spiral, theyshould have either a
	higher-than-average or lower-than-averagemetallicity, but they
	do not give any numbers. The question is: howlarge this
	metallicity difference should be, and is it then
	reallytestable with the Stromgren metallicities from the
	GCS. For instance,Fux (2001 A&A 373 511) showed that, close to
	the OLR of the bar inconfiguration space, chaotic regions are
	more heavily crowded in theregion of the Hercules moving group
	in velocity space, therebyexplaining the presence of the
	Hercules overdensity in velocity space.It is not (a priori)
	clear at all that a higher or lower than averagemetallicity is
	expected for these chaotic orbits. To make such a strongcase,
	the authors should have serious arguments and references to
	atleast estimate what the metallicity difference between the
	movinggroups (and especially Hercules, for which they draw the
	strongestconclusion) and the background should be.  This
	estimate should be basedon a dynamical model and a reasonable
	metallicity gradient inside thedisk. Without this quantitative
	study, and as the paper stands, thestatements, especially
	regarding the Hercules moving group, should be,at the very
	least, tempered. On the other hand, the small analysis
	ofSection 8 and Fig. 17 is interesting indeed, and can be kept
	as it is.

The fourth and fifth paragraphs of section 7 explain in detail the
orbits of stars making up the resonances in the bar and steady-state
spirals scenarios tested in section 7. This discussion, we hope, makes
it clear that some moving groups are associated with orbits in the
inner Galaxy and some with orbits in the outer Galaxy. Basically, the
situation is like this: Moving groups whose mean velocity is lagging
circular motion are near their apogalacticons and are therefore from
the inner Galaxy; the opposite is true for moving groups ahead of
circular motion. We have added this extra explanation to the paper,
hopefully clarifying this.

It is quite true that we did not provide a quantitative estimate of
the metallicity-difference effect or a discussion of whether it would
be observable. Both of these have now been provided. We have given a
simple estimate of the magnitude of the effect in Section 7 by
estimating the mean radius of stars in the moving group and using a
metallicity gradient in [Fe/H] of -0.1 dex/kpc to derive the expected
metallicity differences. These are typically a few hundreds of a dex
and go up to a tenth of a dex for the Hercules moving group (both
these as well as the mean radii are given in table 3). We also
estimated the expected spread around this mean value. In all cases
(except for the NGC 1901 group) the expected spread around the mean is
smaller than the offset from the average metallicity. Therefore, we
expect the metallicity distributions of the moving groups to be
contained in either the lower half of the full metallicity
distribution or the upper half of the metallicity distribution, and
our test to see whether this is borne out in the data should be able
to detect this.

We understand that this is still a very qualitative test and we admit
and discuss this in the discussion of this test.


	Minor comments:
	--------------

	1)At the end of the introduction, it would be good to
	summarize what isgoing to be done in the other sections of
	this long paper, in order forthe occasional reader to have a
	guide through the paper.

We added a sentence at the end of the introduction with pointers to
the main parts of the paper.

	2) Inthe historical introduction, the oldest reference given
	concerning theHercules moving group is Raboud et al. The
	authors should alsodefinitely cite Blaauw (1970): proceedings
	of IAU symp. 38, The spiralstructure of our Galaxy, p. 199

We did not know about this reference, but it is certainly relevant. We
added it in the introduction.

	3) Please provide axis labels on Fig. 7

Figure 7 is an illustration of the model selection context in an
abstract way, so the axes do not really have much significance, but to
make clear that the y-axis is a probability over the x-axis, we have
added some axis-labels.
